Mr. Wiesen, first of all, would you tell us
something about your early life, including the
names of your parents, the dates of their birth and
death, the places where they were born, the place
where you were born, and the time of your birth, the
schools you attended before you went to A&M? I was
born in Fort Worth in 1892. My parents were married
in 1890-some time. Ninety, I believe it was. And my
father had been born in Berlin, and he came to this
country, to Houston, Texas, when he was seven
years old. And the family moved to Baird, Texas. At
that time, the Texas Pacific was moving west, and
it established a terminal at Baird, Texas. And my
grandfather, who was a professional engraver,
moved there. Of course, a watchmaker and And
Graver was kind of a lost affair in a cowboy town,
but the kids, the children grew up there. My father
and his brother and three sisters. And that was
Baird? Baird, Texas. How was that spelled?
B-A-I-R-D in Callahan County. It's about fifteen
miles east of Appalachia. And they lived there. He
built the first rock house in the country, and they
lived there until all the children were grown and
married. And my father, of course, unable to go to
school, he became a printer's devil, and that's
where he learned the English language so that he
could, later years, as a locomotive engineer and
chairman for the Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers, he became, stayed in that position for
some 30 years and died in 1920, 1920.
I've forgotten, 59 I believe. No, it's 49. And my
mother lived on until 56.
Was your mother born in the United States? She was
born in East Texas, in Raines County, Texas, and
the family had come there from Tennessee.
grain and water mill on the Sabine River back
before the Civil War. That was your mother's
father? Yeah, my mother's father. There was a very
large family, and a good many of them passed on. But
I was reared in Fort Worth itself, and I went to
school there. I was in high school from 1907 to
1911.
From there I went to work for a railroad company.
Which railroad? Texas Pacific Railroad Company
in the baggage and ticket department, and
enlisted and enrolled in the business college.
This was in Fort Worth? Fort Worth Brantley Drone
Business College. And for the next two years I was
very active in that, and I had decided after three
years of working for the railroad company, which
my father opposed very much, that I better think
about going to college. And I had a number of
friends who had gone to A&M, and my father told me
that if I would go to A&M and study agriculture, I
could have the farm, which we had between Fort
Worth and Dallas. But that didn't weigh heavily in
my decision, I just, because I knew so many people
had gone to A&M. I went to A&M at night, fall of 15,
and
everything was fine the freshman, sophomore
year, and the junior year, of course, the war came,
had already been in progress since 1914. And when
we got into it, I was eligible for the Leon Springs
training camp, but the doctor, what was his name, I
can't remember, he talked me out of it, and so they
wanted me to finish my course at college. But it was
very soon after the group of us got excited, and 57
of us went over to a pep meeting given by some Army
recruiting officer, and before we knew what
happened to us, we'd all enlisted in the Air Force.
First
of all, let me ask a question before you go on. Did
you have to go through any special procedures to
enter Texas A&M? No. I wrote down there, and they
told me to come on down, and when I came in, old
Reynolds met me at the station at 4 o'clock in the
morning and took me up. Foster Hall and then took me
over that morning to the registrar's office. Who
was it that met you? I think his name was Reynolds. I
can always remember him, but I don't remember his
initials. But he was in D Company, and so that's how
I landed in D Company and Foster Hall. He was down
there looking for recruits for Foster Hall. I see.
By going into Foster Hall, then, you ended up being
in B Company. Yes.
Did you have to send a transcript of your high
school grades? I brought that with me. Did you
receive any credit for the business courses that
you had taken? In fact, I had two deficiencies. I
dropped out the last two months of my senior year
because I had misunderstanding with my math
teacher, who I'd been known all my life, and I felt
that she and the principal let me down. So I left
school without finishing, so I had to make up those
credits. And I had a deficiency in math, which I
made up first year. Made a 99 in it more than I ever
made before. I remember that. What were your first
reactions to A&M and to College Station when you
arrived Well, you see, A&M was out in the country
those days, and we served by two railroads only.
And it was isolated. And I, being four years older
than the average freshman,
I was a little bit more mature looking back on it.
And I felt some restraints about being confined to
the campus, which was very strict in those days.
And, of course, I brought up at home to be
disciplined at home all my life, and I was very
strict about observing the restrictions, the
regulations, and to go into town on Saturday, of
course, you had to go on the trolley car, and there
was nothing after you got there. So I was a little
bit uncomfortable, but the fact that there seemed
so much to do without any supervision or
responsibility was a period of freedom to me. I
enjoyed the, I was told before I went there I
wouldn't like the military, but the military
didn't bother me until later in the year when the
question of hazing came up. And we had a good many
diehards in the upper classes on his hazing
question, and there was considerable hazing went
on. Sub Rosen. Well, the first I knew about it, one
of the seniors came out and asked me what I thought
about Bissell's speech on hazing, and I told him I
agreed with it in that put me on the blacklist in
that group for the rest of the year. I'm pretty
sure, looking back on it, because I was, I didn't
get run and hazed very much. I was abused by one or
two people, and the only person I ever hated in my
life was the sophomore who cleared through the
school, was one of the person who was very brutal to
me. And I intended to kill him one time. I decided I
was going to do that, but I got control of my senses
enough to realize that these things were passing,
and so nothing came of it. But my sophomore year, I
think, was my happiest year there.
I had, of course, many friends, and it was very
pleasant. Like some of the most more pleasant
reflections I've had in a lot of years has been in
that period of time. And then when the
time came to decide about going into the Army,
this group of us that went in were thrown together
in one area. And that year, of course, was one of the
very severe winters, and we had lots of sickness,
and the flu epidemic broke out. This was the flu
epidemic on campus? Yes. They had some temporary
buildings built around. I couldn't locate them
now. I know where they were, but we had an influx of
people from all over the north and east into this
service company. And our hospital was a new
building, but it was not intended for such large
numbers, and they couldn't accommodate all the
people who were ill.
I was confined to Ross Hall, third floor, and I got
the flu just right out of the blue.
I never went to hospital, and never saw the doctor,
and after three or four weeks, I couldn't get out of
bed. And some women on the campus in the Home
Economics Department inquired about me, and they
told it. They didn't even miss me out of the office,
apparently, it was so much confusion. I was
assistant to the adjutant. And these two women
either paid or bribed or did, arranged with these
soldiers to get a litter and bring me down to their
house on the campus. And they set me up on this cot in
their living room, and they started to work on me.
If they hadn't, I wouldn't have lived, because
they were dying all around there, you know. And
those two people were Marty Higgins in the Home
Economics Department, not the State Home
Demonstration Agent, pardon me, And Laura Neal
was in charge. And they were the two people that
Laura Neal had been, that was a teacher in Fort
Worth High School when I was a student there.
That's the reason I knew her, came to know her. And
Marty Higgins always said later that I was her fish
because I always kept the house in repair on the
campus. Well, this was sort of an appreciation for
taking care of you while you were sick, I think.
Indeed. In fact, we were in contact all the years
later. She died at the age of 83, four years ago, in
Arlington. She had, while I was in China, she
married E.E. Davis, who was the first dean of the
Arlington School, and they lived in Arlington.
But I'm getting ahead of myself in a way because on
graduation, We had no replacement service at that
time, and it was always a headache for those
graduating what they were going to do, those whose
parents hadn't already provided a place for them.
And so I made the expression to the local Episcopal
minister that I would like to go as far away so far
away from A&M to take $49 to send a postal card home.
And of course they laughed about that, and I have
since. And so the next day or two, he told me that
they wanted somebody to teach school in Japan.
Well, I said, you know, I'm not fit for a teacher. I
don't have enough equipment for a teacher. Well,
he said the type of school they have there, you
would probably wouldn't find too much
difficulty. If you want, I'll write to the board in
New York and give them your name," and he did. But in
the meantime, I was given recommendations to
various organizations, particularly in Dallas,
and I went up to Plyford Shops, and I was told that I
was, had good training, but I'd had no experience.
They couldn't use me. I communicated this to Dean
Kyle, who was, I relied on for most of my
information anyhow and advice. And he told me to
get on a train and go out to Fort Stockton and to take
over a job of measuring water for one of the two
first irrigation projects out there. So it took an
almost three-day trip by train I got to Fort
Stockton and was taken out on the reservation
there. I stayed there until the following spring,
when most of the work was done. In the meantime, I
was in contact with this fiscal board of missions,
and they wanted me to go to China. They, of course,
laid out the plans, and I accepted that. But I had to
wait for the summer, so I took a job with the Cisco
Chamber of Commerce. on the way home back to Fort
Worth and stayed there for four or five months with
working with them on a drive to raise the bond
issue, money for a bond issue to build a dam, which
was done after I left. So I got myself together and
went to China. I left on August 18th from Vancouver
in 1920. And six weeks later, I was in Shanghai, and
I stayed with the mission school for the next two
years, and
decided that I needed to come home because I was
only getting $70 a month, and I couldn't pay my
taxes back home. So I was telling my troubles to Dr.
Washoe, who later became famous in the Roosevelt
administration for saving an American crew over
in Java. Dr. Waslow advised me to take the job in
Hankow instead of going home. Hankow was an
international city across the river from
Wuchang, the capital of Hubei province in China.
So I interviewed manager of this dollar-a-rubber
dollar company. They had a big lumber yard and a big
warehouse of railroad and firefighting
equipment and things of that kind. It was an import
house. And they sent me to Shanghai on the first
trip to one of the most palatial river steamers
that ever operated on the river. Of course, a
country boy from America, I was very much
impressed with all of this. So after a week of
training in the Shanghai office, they sent me back
to Hancao, and the managers, a year later, decided
to retire and come home, and left me there, but they
sent people from other parts of the world in there
to operate the district manager over me. And we
sold lumber. operated river steamers on the upper
river, which was to me a very romantic operation,
both profitable and dangerous, and exciting in
other words. But there I learned, put into
practice all my knowledge of accounting, and I of
course, had to be active in the foreign community,
which was predominantly British, but had
Russians and not very many Germans at that time,
but Japanese who were not socially acceptable in
those days. But we had a very pleasant colonial
atmosphere under extraterritorial religion,
and
life was the kind of life that a person might want to
live today in retirement if they had the money to
live like we lived there, because without much
money we had very many luxuries. Of course, plenty
of servants and not much expense. And that lasted
for until the company reorganized around the
World Service and gave preference to California
people. rather than people from other parts of the
country, and my dissatisfaction was expressed to
a close associate in another company, a firm that
had been in China for a hundred years, a private
firm, exporters of tung oil oil, or Chinese wood
oil. And they wanted me to come over there, and so I
arranged with the company in Shanghai after they
decided they were not going to give me a promotion
of any kind. And I went back upriver to Gillespie
and Sons and became assistant manager there for
the next four years. We had operated the
distributorship for the Ford Motor Company, and I
was in charge of that program, which meant that I
had to get out in the country to get towns to
cooperate to build roads between towns and then
sell them. cars and build the bodies, truck
bodies, I mean passenger bodies to go on, because
commercial trucks were not quite out of the
question at that time because it was cheap labor,
but people wanted to ride. So Pepper laid out these
agencies and got the roads built, and then we sold,
built the cars and sold the cars, and this program
went on for When I left in 27, when the Ford Motor
Company went out of production, we had 50,000
miles of roads. And the last project was the first
cars in Sichuan province. That's the Sichuan
province beyond the mountains in western China,
next to Tibet. And after many excursions in there
afoot, finally pinned down. The missionaries had
built very beautiful city streets for China.
There was 400 missionaries in that area of all
denominations, and they had cooperated in the
opposition to the home boards in buying land
around a given area and establishing a university
in the center which was owned by all of them, but
administered by a special group representative
of these groups. And the West China Union
University was an outstanding institution. And
they had provided the incentive for people to be
more forward looking. And for that reason, I was
able to sell them on a program of cars. And I put the
first cars in. 18 months to deliver it all. Some of
them had to be, packages had to be broken down in
100-pound packages and carried over the
mountains on man's back and put back together
again. But that was the last program we had in
China, and the Communist Revolution came in at
that time. It actually came in in 25, and it reached
central China by 27. who forced out practically
all the missionaries from the Orient, and most
businesses were curtailed.
I came home on leave at that time after four years.
This would have been on leave from Gillespie. Yes.
That was a practice in the Orient to send you home
for six months, expenses paid after every four
years. I think that originally originated in
India, where the climate was so severe that it
affected the physical capacity of people to stay
in that hot climate so many—a long period. But in
it, the British customs rather prevailed
throughout the Orient in those days, and so that's
one of the things that all companies did, all
foreign companies did. They had families that
sent the whole work home for six months vacation on
full pay, and then come back. But while I was home,
the things broke loose there. The company lost $5
billion on the breaking of the market for shellac
in India. My firm was, had been in from the
beginning. The importation of shellac was very
important in the, in the record business. at that
time, and radio began to come in, and the record
business went on the skids, and the shellac market
broke, and that had some effect on the firm, and
then the speculation in wood oil, which had been
interrupted by the Communist Revolution in 25,
27, 28, and so they sold out Spencer Kellogg and
left one man in charge out there to wind up. So I was
out of a job yet. Could we stop at this point of your
career and kind of back up a little bit to your days
on campus? I did get away from that, didn't I? Okay.
I'm sorry. You should have stopped me. Well, I was
interested in your story about going to China and
your activities there. You said that your train
arrived in College Station at like four o'clock in
the morning and it was a representative from Ross
Hall. Was this a common practice? From Foster
Hall. Foster Hall, I'm sorry. I think it was. It was
a common practice. I did practice it myself in
later years, but I noticed that Foster Hall was one
of the older halls, you see, and Mitchell Hall and
two others were modern, had steam heat. Foster
Hall, Ross Hall, and the band hall, what was that
name in Austin Hall? Mm-hmm. were the first
buildings on the campus, and they had wood stoves
and wash pans and a washstand. You had to go
downstairs to get your water and bring it up. You
had to go out and bring your wood up. And that was one
of the real activities of all the freshmen, is to
keep the wood boxes full on all those four floors.
And so naturally, the other dormitories didn't
have to work. People didn't have to everybody
wanted to get in the more modern places. And all
those country boys, so-called, we got over in
Foster Hall. You were recruited for Foster Hall
then, or one of the other ones, by one of the
upperclassmen, I take it. Yeah. I think of his name
one of these days. I mean, I can't call it, I see him,
I can visualize him. So it was a practice primarily
then of the older dormitories to be at the train
station and recruit their freshmen so they'd have
somebody to fill the wood box and carry the water
for them. That was the assumption. Now I don't know
whether that was actually true or not. Would you
describe a typical day? when you were in school. I
would like for you to include the time of getting up
and the procedure of getting up and what you did
then and as far as going to meals and the time you
spent in class and what you did otherwise. Well, of
course, you know, we wore blue shirts, blue shirts
with a blue uniform, a gray uniform, I guess you'd
call it gray, had a bow tie. Most of us never had a bow
tie before and it was a learning tie, but Reveille,
you were out of bed, and you had to get down, and you
had to have that bow tie on. Some of the
upperclassmen would go down there and weren't
dressed that way, but got away with it. But we
freshmen, we had to have that bow tie. I learned to
tie a bow tie running downstairs. How much time did
you have between Reveille and the time you had to be
there? I don't recall, but I think it was five
minutes. It may have been ten, but I doubt it. I
think it seemed like it was five minutes. So you had
to get out of bed and get dressed and be down there.
Get down there, yes. But it may have been ten
minutes, but as I recall, I think it was five
minutes. We were always in line. I was always in
line when the vehicle sounded.
We had setting up exercises, too. This was right
after you got down in the line? Yeah, we got down in
the line. We were all accounted for. Then we had
setting up exercises and dismissed and went back
to clean our rooms and got the next call for
breakfast. And then we had formation and marched
to the hall for breakfast. And then when we came
back, we were supposed to have an inspection. I
forgot at what time, before we went to class. And
they had an inspection of the room. Everything had
to be cleaned. Not the regular inspection—Sunday
mornings we had a regular inspection by the
incumbent, but
whoever was on daily duty—what do we call that? At
daily duty, somebody came and inspected the room.
See, the bed was made up— Wouldn't that have been
the officer of the day? Officer of the day, what I'm
trying to say. Gee, I'll remember that, officer of
the day. And then we went to classes. And of course,
we had different schedules. Some had, most of us
had an eight o'clock class. But the class schedule
followed until four o'clock. And then we had
drill.
And that was pretty regular, five days a week,
except on Friday was a dress parade. And that was,
in the wintertime, of course, it was They didn't
have the setting up exercises when it was severe
weather, but that was the ordinary run of things of
the day. Three times the mess hall. After the mess
hall, for the first week, of course, we had to go to
the chapel for instructions and various
organizations announcing their programs and
things of that kind. But there wasn't much
argument in the way of private argument. There was
no secret organization. It literally formed the
clubs, the Fort Worth Club, the Lamb County Club,
people from that group. And they had meetings in
the dormitory room between—it was usually in the
evening between seven thirty and ten when taps
sounded.
I don't know of any other activity except in the
fall when the football game—we were all out for
that. And later, as basketball developed, we went
to basketball games on the campus. There wasn't
anything off the campus. It was confined to the
campus. Were there any facilities in the Y, say,
for YMCA? The YMCA had a swimming pool, which was
not there the first year. But it was the second, and
I never did get in that pool. They had Sunday school
classes after chapel in the YMCA.